A tentative schedule
====================

Day 1 - July 8
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*Morning:*

Framing the problem: short intro presentations by

 - Titus Brown (welcome/overview)
 - Greg Wilson (teaching and motivating compute)
 - Julie Libarkin (the trials and tribulations of assessment)
 - Karthik Ram (data!)

1-2 minute raps by everyone else, introducing themselves and bringing out
keywords and concepts that they want to explore.

To ground broader discussion, we will design and write user stories,
such as:

   Jane is a marine ecologist. She's just found a paper that claims
   such and such, and she wants to play.  She'll download the data,
   load it into Excel, extract two columns by cut-and-paste into an
   editor, etc.

We will then followed these stories by, "And here's what we'd like her
to do!" => motivate specific education.

**Lunch**

*Afternoon:*

Afternoon session 1: Pair or group: now we want to tell (a) how much
of this topic does Jane already know (if any), and (b) how can we tell
afterward if she's learned it?  i.e. what are assessment
methods/modalities/topics?

(pair- or group-ing to outline lesson plans or narratives; redundancy
allowed; links to relevant material/plans (or search terms thereto)
requested)

**Break**

Afternoon session 2: present & discuss.  Map out additional topics, in
less depth.

Day 2 - July 9
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*Morning day 2:*

Show and tell & discuss.

Everyone gives at least one five minute intro to something they think
scientists ought to be using that most other people in the room won't
already know about (or at least, won't be using).  For each, we work
backward to ask what someone needs to understand in order to use that
thing, which could be Travis CI, a coverage tool to see what parts of
code are being exercised, OData, etc. (This encourages everyone to do a
bit of thinking in advance, which is good, and gives us something
concrete to give back in the white paper ("In order to use cool thing
XYZ, people need to learn PQR", rather than, "We think people ought to
learn PQR").)

*Afternoon:*

Afternoon session 1:

BREAKOUT: pair- or group- hack on lesson plans, this time based on
disjoint/nonoverlap concepts; rejoin, discuss

**Break**

Afternoon session 2: TBD.  Probably focused on outputs.
